README.md, before:

# EasyDSL

> First-steps tutorial

## Wanted effect

So, you need a DSL.
Usually you will use it to set up some objects, which then will be used in some process.
For example, you could need a DSL for simple address book, that would look like this:

    addressBook(name: "Hanks contacts") {
        personal = true
        owner {
            name "Hank"
            surname "Venture"
            nick "Batman"
        }
        contacts {
            person(surname: "Samson") {
                name "Brock"
                email = "samson@sphinx.secret"
            }
            person {
                name "Dean"
                surname "Venture"
                email = "dean_o@venture.industries.com"
                nick "Dean-O"
                nick "bro"
            }
        }
    }

In you application you would obtain some AddressBook object and analyze it, for example by looking through personas.

It is easily doable with EasyDSL.

## Create top class

First, you define and annotate top level class as such:

> I'm adding @Canonical to each and every class defined here for easy comparison and representation in further example.

    @Canonical
    class AddressBook {
        @Access
        boolean personal
        
        @Configure
        Person owner
    
        @CollectScope(elementName = "person", type = Person)
        @Configure
        List<Person> contacts
    }

And thats pretty much it here. 
@Access annotation will generate both setter and getter in result DSL.
@Configure means that DSLs method owner has up to 3 arguments:
 
    owner(Map properties =[:], Person defaultValue = null, Closure configure).

It will be described further. In the end, this is what you use to get standard gradle-like hierarchy.
 
@CollectScope is example of modifier annotation - it doesn't generate DSL behaviour, but extends it.
It means that instead of standard case (like with @Configure above) it should generate method with field name 
(a "scope"), taking closure which is executed to create and collect list elements.
It should only be used on List fields. %todo: this may change in the future
Its parameters specify what will be name of @Configure-generated method used to create list elements.

## Create classes for lower-level elements

Next, you create Person class:

    @Canonical
    class Person {
        @Access
        @MethodSetter
        String name

        @Access
        @MethodSetter
        String surname

        @Access
        @MethodSetter
        String email

        @Collect(elementName = "nick", type = String)
        @MethodSetter
        List<String> nicks
    }

As shown above, there may be more than one non-modifier annotation on each field.

@MethodSetter annotation allows you to omit '=' sign in DSL while setting attributes.
In fact, this is actually alias for another annotation with special configuration, but that is out of scope of 
this first-steps tutorial.

@Collect is another modifier annotation.
It works in similiar fashion as @CollectScope, but it doesn't create method visualising hierarchy like "contacts" in 
class above.

%todo: discuss Configure
 
## Wrap it up into parser

Now, we create additional class for parsing our DSL. 
It isn't necessary, but it allows "cleaner" approach for providing DSL to end-user.
  
    class AddressBookParser {
        @Configure
        AddressBook addressBook
        
        static AddressBook parse(Closure closure){
            return Utils.configure(new AddressBookParser(), closure).addressBook
        }
    }
    
Yep, that's it!

Utils.configure takes an object and configuration closure, then creates a Configurator object.
It's metaclass is expando-enhanced with methods, basing on field and method annotations.
Those methods keep track of first given object and access its fields and delegate to its methods.
Closure is called with that Configurator as delegate, and then configured object is returned.

%todo: mention trait

## Test it

Now you can test it, e.g. with a Groovy script:

    AddressBook book = AdressBookParser.parse {
        addressBook(name: "Hanks contacts") {
            personal = true
            owner {
                name "Hank"
                surname "Venture"
                nick "Batman"
            }
            contacts {
                person(surname: "Samson") {
                    name "Brock"
                    email = "samson@sphinx.secret"
                }
                person {
                    name "Dean"
                    surname "Venture"
                    email = "dean_o@venture.industries.com"
                    nick "Dean-O"
                    nick "bro"
                }
            }
        }
    }
     
    assert book.name == "Hanks contacts"
    assert book.owner.nicks == [ "Batman" ]
    assert book.contacts.first().email == "samson@sphinx.secret"
    assert book.contacts.last().nicks.size() == 2
    
Profit!

Commit message:

Format README, provide running example as a test, debug a little (scope didn't create target instance if it was needed)

README.md, after:

# EasyDSL

> First-steps tutorial. It is available on repo as a [test case](src/test/groovy/can/i/has/easy_dsl/addressBook/Example.groovy).

## Wanted effect

So, you need a DSL.
Usually you will use it to set up some objects, which then will be used in some process.
For example, you could need a DSL for simple address book, that would look like this:

    addressBook(name: "Hanks contacts") {
        personal = true
        owner {
            name "Hank"
            surname "Venture"
            nick "Batguy"
        }
        contacts {
            person(surname: "Samson") {
                name "Brock"
                email = "samson@sphinx.secret"
            }
            person {
                name "Dean"
                surname "Venture"
                email = "dean_o@venture.industries.com"
                nick "Dean-O"
                nick "bro"
            }
        }
    }

In you application you would obtain some AddressBook object and analyze it, for example by looking through personas.

It is easily doable with EasyDSL.

## Create top class

First, you define and annotate top level class as such:

> I'm adding `@Canonical` to each and every class defined here for easy comparison and representation in further example.

    @Canonical
    class AddressBook {
        @Access
        boolean personal
        
        @Configure
        Person owner
    
        @CollectScope(elementName = "person", type = Person)
        @Configure
        List<Person> contacts
    }

And thats pretty much it here. 
`@Access` annotation will generate both setter and getter in result DSL.
`@Configure` means that DSLs method owner has up to 3 arguments:
 
    owner(Map properties =[:], Person defaultValue = null, Closure configure).

It will be described further. In the end, this is what you use to get standard gradle-like hierarchy.
 
`@CollectScope` is example of modifier annotation - it doesn't generate DSL behaviour, but extends it.
It means that instead of standard case (like with @Configure above) it should generate method with field name 
(a "scope"), taking closure which is executed to create and collect list elements.
It should only be used on List fields. 

* todo: this may change in the future

Its parameters specify what will be the name and return type of `@Configure`-generated method used to create list elements.

## Create classes for lower-level elements

Next, you create `Person` class:

    @Canonical
    class Person {
        @Access
        @MethodSetter
        String name

        @Access
        @MethodSetter
        String surname

        @Access
        @MethodSetter
        String email

        @Collect(elementName = "nick", type = String)
        @MethodSetter
        List<String> nicks
    }

As shown above, there may be more than one non-modifier annotation on each field.

`@MethodSetter` annotation allows you to omit `=` sign in DSL while setting attributes.
This is actually alias for another annotation with special configuration, but that is out of scope of 
this first-steps tutorial.

`@Collect` is another modifier annotation.
It works in similiar fashion as `@CollectScope`, but it doesn't create method visualising hierarchy like `contacts` in 
the class above.

* todo: discuss Configure
 
## Wrap it up into parser

Now, we create additional class for parsing our DSL. 
It isn't necessary, but it allows "cleaner" approach for providing DSL to end-user.
  
    class AddressBookParser {
        @Configure
        AddressBook addressBook
        
        static AddressBook parse(Closure closure){
            return Utils.configure(new AddressBookParser(), closure).addressBook
        }
    }
    
Yep, that's it!

`Utils.configure` takes an object and configuration closure, then creates a `Configurator` object.
It's metaclass is expando-enhanced with methods, basing on field and method annotations.
Those methods keep track of first given object and access its fields and delegate to its methods.
Closure is called with that `Configurator` as delegate, and then configured object (first argument) is returned.

* todo: mention trait

## Test it

Now you can test it, e.g. with a Groovy script:

    AddressBook book = AdressBookParser.parse {
        addressBook(name: "Hanks contacts") {
            personal = true
            owner {
                name "Hank"
                surname "Venture"
                nick "Batguy"
            }
            contacts {
                person(surname: "Samson") {
                    name "Brock"
                    email = "samson@sphinx.secret"
                }
                person {
                    name "Dean"
                    surname "Venture"
                    email = "dean_o@venture.industries.com"
                    nick "Dean-O"
                    nick "bro"
                }
            }
        }
    }
     
    assert book.name == "Hanks contacts"
    assert book.owner.nicks == [ "Batguy" ]
    assert book.contacts.first().email == "samson@sphinx.secret"
    assert book.contacts.last().nicks.size() == 2
    
Profit!
